OIDC and social login
OpenID Connect\[[1](https://openid.net/developers/discover-openid-and-openid-connect/)] (OIDC) is a prevalent, standardized, and modern protocol used to securely verify a user’s identity for online services. Since [authentication](/securebydesign/authn-intro/) is a fundamental security measure, it is essential for these services to correctly identify their users; OIDC provides a means to achieve this. OIDC relies on a trusted identity provider (_OIDC provider_ or _IdP_), allowing applications (_clients_) to delegate user authentication to the IdP while focusing on their core functionality.
OIDC was developed by the OpenID\[[2](https://openid.net/)] open-source standards body and is built on OAuth 2.0\[[3](https://oauth.net/2/)]. OAuth 2.0 is mainly concerned with authorization and resource access control but does not specialize in user authentication; this makes OIDC and OAuth 2.0 complimentary.
The IdP shares limited information about the user, and what may be shared is disclosed at the time the user agrees to allow the IdP to authenticate themselves to the app. Apps never see the user’s IdP passwords or other sensitive authentication information and cannot act as that user on the IdP.
Social login
Identity providers are commonly large websites with millions of users. Historically these providers were mostly social media providers such as Facebook, so this approach is commonly called _social login_. The term, however, is somewhat misleading because there is no social element involved in the authentication process, and not all IdPs (for example, Google) are social media companies. OIDC is the most popular form of social login.
An app can utilize social login as a means of authentication. Users will find it convenient to not need to set up login (e.g., username/password) with yet another online service and will not need to trust the app to securely store their credentials. Users will often already have an existing account with at least one IdP supported by the app and the app will benefit in the form of increased engagement from the user’s reduced registration and login friction. Apps can choose which specific IdPs to support authentication with, reflecting on their target audience. Social login can be combined with additional authentication steps such as [MFA](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa). Apps may also provide non-social authentication options for users who do not want to use any of the provided IdPs for login.
Social login compared to SSO
Both social login and [single sign-on (SSO)](/securebydesign/authn-using-saml2/) involve users authenticating to an application through a third party. SSO is an initiative typically undertaken by organizations, such as businesses or schools, intending to set  up a unified authentication provider. This provider is then used by internal users to access all the online systems provided by the organization. In essence, it is a one-stop authentication solution for multiple services. Enterprise SSO frequently relies on [SAML2](/securebydesign/authn-using-saml2/) for implementation.
In contrast, social login is established at the level of an individual online service and is often not the only supported authentication approach. As a result of this ad hoc establishment, consumers frequently find themselves using a variety of providers for different services and not using external authentication at all for other services.
Wading into OIDC
Security tokens
OIDC provides a means for your app to reliably establish a user’s identity without the app itself needing to handle user credentials. The result of successful OIDC authentication is two security tokens your app can use:

1.  The _identity token_ attests to the user’s identity and contains information about the end-user (a _subject claim_).
2.  The _access token_ allows the app to get certain information from the user’s account on the IdP.

Both tokens are equipped with digital signatures, ensuring straightforward validation and enhancing security. Additionally, both tokens feature relatively short expiration periods, which can be refreshed, thereby diminishing susceptibility to attacks.
Registering with an OIDC provider
You need to register your app with an IdP before you can start using it for authentication. The process is provider-specific, but you may need to provide information and sign an agreement. Once the relationship has been established, you will be assigned a client ID and client secret which are required later for user authentication. Note that some providers provide separate proprietary social login solutions (e.g., “Facebook Login” or “Sign In with Google SDKs”), so be sure you are following the OIDC process specifically.
Authentication process
The following sequence of interactions occurs when the end user elects to authenticate to (login to) an app using a certain supported provider\[[4](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#CodeFlowAuth)].

1.  Request initiation: The app prepares a request for the IDP; it uses its client ID and secret to prove that it is the requesting client. This contains a _scope of access_ with the set of information the app wants from the user’s account. It then directs the user’s browser to the IdP’s login page, passing along the request.
2.  Request validation: The IdP verifies the requesting client details.
3.  Login and consent: If the user is not already logged into the IdP, they will need to do so on that login page. In the present day, they typically would do this with their [email address (or username) and password](/securebydesign/authn-using-passwords/) and perhaps with a [second authentication factor (2FA)](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa), but login could also be via [FIDO passkeys](/securebydesign/authn-using-passkeys/) or any other [means of authentication](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#approaches-to-authn) allowed by the IdP. This step authenticates the user to the IdP. The IdP may ask the user to consent to the app’s requested scope of access.
4.  Security token creation: Assuming user authentication on the IdP succeeds and the user accepts the scope of access, the IDP generates [security tokens](#security-tokens) and an access code for retrieving those tokens.
5.  Response with authentication result: The IdP redirects the user’s browser back to the app, passing along the access code. This is a form of callback and is made to a URL provided by the app in the initial request.
6.  Token validation: The app directly calls the IdP with the access code to retrieve the security tokens, which the app validates to prevent spoofing.
7.  Post-authentication: The app can now consider the user to be authenticated or it can require additional authentication steps. It can also require new users to set up their user profiles.

At any point after this, the app can request in-scope information from the user’s account on the IdP. It provides the access token as proof of authorization.
Figure 1 depicts this visually:

There are protocol details not covered in the above overview, e.g., PCKE flows being used for mobile clients due to higher risk of code interception\[[5](https://auth0.com/docs/get-started/authentication-and-authorization-flow/authorization-code-flow-with-proof-key-for-code-exchange-pkce)]. Check references if you are going to implement OIDC yourself.
