Overview
Authentication is a fundamental security measure, verifying user identity and allowing you to lock down what a user can see and do correctly. Biometric\[[1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biometrics)] authentication leverages the unique physical and behavioral traits of users (fingerprints, facial structure, voice patterns, and more) to verify their identity. Each individual's biometric data is inherently distinctive, making it difficult for attackers to gain unauthorized access.
Beyond being a higher security approach, biometric authentication is convenient for users. With this, they can skip the hassle of remembering and typing in long [passwords](/securebydesign/authn-using-passwords/) or retrieving a one-time code from [email](/securebydesign/authn-using-trx-otp/), [SMS](/securebydesign/authn-using-trx-otp/), or [an app](/securebydesign/authn-using-totp/). Instead, they can simply scan their fingerprint or face to log in.
Use of biometrics for authentication
Biometrics can be used as a standalone authentication mechanism (e.g., for phone unlocks), as a [second authentication factor](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa) (e.g., to supplement password authentication), or as part of a protocol such as [WebAuthn](/securebydesign/authn-using-webauthn/) or [FIDO passkeys](/securebydesign/authn-using-passkeys/) where it provides user verification. In the context of [multi-factor authentication (MFA)](/securebydesign/authn-intro/#mfa-and-2fa), biometrics serve as a “something you are” authentication factor.
Some mobile apps allow the use of biometrics through facilities such as Face ID as convenience as an alternative to the user entering a PIN or password. Unlike with the MFA case, this does not increase security since attackers can continue to use a PIN or password if that makes it easier for them to pass authentication; if the biometric authentication was somehow easier for them to pass, then adding that as an option actually lowered the security bar.
How biometric authentication works
The following entities participate in biometric authentication:

- The user: The individual who is trying to authenticate themselves by providing their biometric data.
- The capture device: The device that captures a _biometric sample_ from the user. Examples include fingerprint scanners, cameras, and microphones.
- The biometric matcher: The software that compares the user's biometric sample to the stored reference data. This can be done on the client or the server.
- The authentication server: This software makes the final decision about whether or not to authenticate the user.
  During biometric matching, the captured biometric sample is processed to extract distinctive features unique to the individual. For example, in the case of a fingerprint, ridge patterns are extracted; for facial recognition, key facial landmarks are identified. During biometric enrollment, the extracted features are used to create a unique but efficient digital representation called a _biometric template_. That becomes linked to the user’s account.
  When the user later attempts to access the system or application, they provide their biometric data again using the capture device. Features are again extracted in the matcher and comparisons are made to the template and the strength of the match is evaluated. The authentication server evaluates the results from the matcher and possibly leverages other indicators. Based on the authentication result, authorization decisions are made, e.g., if the user can access a particular user account or perform a funds transfer.
  This diagram depicts the authentication process visually:
